The Project Gutenberg eBook of Some great American books
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Some great American books

Author: Dallas Lore Sharp

Release date: February 19, 2025 [eBook #75416]

Language: English

Original publication: Chicago: American Library Association, 1925

Credits: Bob Taylor, Tim Lindell and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOME GREAT AMERICAN BOOKS ***





  Transcriber’s Note
  Italic text displayed as: _italic_




Reading with a Purpose

A Series of Reading Courses


  1. BIOLOGY                                           _Vernon Kellogg_
  2. ENGLISH LITERATURE                              _W. N. C. Carlton_
  3. TEN PIVOTAL FIGURES OF HISTORY                 _Ambrose W. Vernon_
  4. SOME GREAT AMERICAN BOOKS                      _Dallas Lore Sharp_
  6. FRONTIERS OF KNOWLEDGE                         _Jesse Lee Bennett_
  7. EARS TO HEAR: A GUIDE FOR MUSIC LOVERS      _Daniel Gregory Mason_
  8. SOCIOLOGY AND SOCIAL PROBLEMS                     _Howard W. Odum_
  10. CONFLICTS IN AMERICAN PUBLIC OPINION        _William Allen White_
                                                   and _Walter E. Myer_
  11. PSYCHOLOGY AND ITS USE                      _Everett Dean Martin_
  13. OUR CHILDREN                                       _M. V. O’Shea_


_Others in Preparation_

  5. ECONOMICS                          _Leon C. Marshall_
  9. THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES                 _E. E. Slosson_
  12. PHILOSOPHY                    _Alexander Meiklejohn_
  14. RELIGION IN EVERYDAY LIFE      _Wilfred T. Grenfell_
  15. THE LIFE OF CHRIST                  _Rufus M. Jones_


American Library Association




  Reading with a Purpose

  SOME GREAT
  AMERICAN BOOKS

  _By_
  DALLAS LORE SHARP

  [Illustration: Decoration]

  CHICAGO
  AMERICAN LIBRARY ASSOCIATION
  1925




  COPYRIGHT 1925, BY THE
  AMERICAN LIBRARY ASSOCIATION

  PUBLISHED AUGUST, 1925

  PRINTED IN THE U. S. A.




WHY THIS COURSE IS PUBLISHED


This course has been prepared for men and women, and for young people
out of school, who wish to know more about the literature of America.
It comprises a very brief introduction to the subject and a guide to a
few of the best books. The books are arranged for consecutive reading.
They should be available in any general library, or may be obtained
through any good book store.

A good general knowledge of the subject should result from following
through the course of reading suggested in this booklet—a knowledge
greatly superior to that of the average citizen. If you wish to pursue
the subject further, the librarian of your Public Library will be glad
to make suggestions. If you desire to increase your knowledge in other
fields, you are referred to the other courses in this Reading with a
Purpose series, and to your Public Library.

  THE AMERICAN LIBRARY ASSOCIATION




THE AUTHOR


Dallas Lore Sharp _has won distinction as naturalist, teacher and man
of letters_.

_As a country-bred boy, a student at Brown University, assistant
professor and since 1908 professor of English at Boston University,
for many years also farmer and naturalist at his home in the hills
of Hingham, father, teacher and comrade of four boys of his own, his
career has developed consistently and happily, work and recreation
following the same path. In his literary labors and teaching he has
never lost the enthusiasm of the amateur. He is a keen observer of
nature and human nature and a lifelong student, teacher and lover of
literature._

THE SPIRIT OF THE HIVE _is the latest of his volumes of essays which
include also_ THE HILLS OF HINGHAM, WHERE ROLLS THE OREGON, EDUCATION
IN A DEMOCRACY, THE MAGICAL CHANCE _and others. Mr. Sharp’s name is
especially familiar to readers of the_ ATLANTIC MONTHLY _where many of
his essays have first appeared. He has been well described as “a man
who sees the world as eternally new, who sees life as eternally young
and to whom living is a great adventure.”_




SOME GREAT AMERICAN BOOKS


Out of a hundred great American books, which every American ought to
know, what ten or twelve shall I suggest for this course? A difficult
question. No two persons would make the same selection. Yet no one, I
venture, will say that those I am taking are not eminently worth while.

But, first, may I make a few suggestions on how to read, before I offer
advice on what to read? “Not how many but how good books” is the secret
of being well read, according to an ancient saying. But very much
depends on how well you read those good books.

Put no premium on speed. Don’t dawdle; but take your time. Read
the great book sympathetically and in a leisurely way. Be positive
about it. Be aggressive, even pugnacious, rather than listless and
languishing. Read the stirring sections over and over. Store them
in your memory. Cite them in talk and letters—anything to make them
yours. Get your friends to reading the same things at the same time.
Associate, if you can, with those who do read. Don’t be a literary
“soak,” a mere absorber of print. The real reader is critical, which
means appreciative of the good and the poor in a book. He stops to
enjoy a fine passage in the text as a traveler stops to enjoy a lovely
scene in the landscape. He is just as ready to debate a point with his
author also—to hold out against him here; to approve and yield the
point there; and often to forget the book altogether in his attempt
to follow a gleam which, starting out of some illuminating line of
the page, goes wavering through the twilight of the reader’s dawning
thought,

    “And, ere it vanishes
    Over the margin,
    After it, follow it,
    Follow the gleam.”

Again, learn to read aloud—not every book, to be sure, yet as many
of these as you can. There is much reading for information and mere
pleasure which must be done silently and swiftly, and even with
judicious skipping for the sake of speed. The books we are going to
read are for pleasure and for information and for something even
greater—a spiritual something, a noble companionship and stimulus
hard to define, which is as much found in their manner as in their
matter, or, as we say, in their style. Good prose is as full of music
as good verse. What is sweeter to the hearing ear than the rhythms of
prose like John Muir’s or Lincoln’s or Poe’s? English is a beautiful
language, containing the most glorious literature ever written. We
should revel in its harmonies no less than wrestle with its thoughts.

There is no invariable answer to the question, how to read, any more
than to the question, what to read, because books are of so many sorts
and values, and readers are just as diverse. Much reading is required
for general intelligence. A wide acquaintance with good books is about
all there is to an education. You may have a college diploma or you may
not; but if you are not a reader, no matter how many degrees you may
possess, you are not possessed of an education. To know the King James
Version of the _Bible_, Shakespeare, Dante, Milton, _Don Quixote_,
_Mother Goose_, _Uncle Remus_, and such books—this is to be on speaking
terms with the learned and cultured of the world.

We are Americans, and this is a course in American books, but we and
our books are very much what the past, the Old World and its books,
has made us. Any wide course of reading ought to include the great
books of that Old World out of which we have come, books which all the
world loves and has gone to school to. The spirit and institutions of
our country are English, like our language. So true is this that we
can hardly understand our American mind and customs unless we read the
history and the literature of Old England. The great English authors
like Chaucer, Spenser, Burns, Wordsworth, Burke, and Dickens belong as
much to us as to England, and not to know them is not to know whence
we came and who we are in the way of feeling and thought. No time, no
nation, no book, no man, lives to himself alone, or is self-begotten
and wholly original.

This is not a required course, and all that I can do is to suggest some
of the books which have meant much to me, and which have a durable
place in our love and thought. It would be well should I name one
hundred titles, say, and let you choose. That is about all that one can
do.

Out of the following twenty-five great American books, for example,
which ten or twelve shall I suggest for reading: _The history
of Plimouth Plantation_; the _Autobiography_ of Jefferson; the
_Autobiography_ of Franklin; Lodge’s _Life of George Washington_;
Tarbell’s _Life of Abraham Lincoln_; _The sketch book_; _Walden_;
_Essays_ of Emerson; _The scarlet letter_; _The pit_; _The rise of
Silas Lapham_; _The gentle reader_ by Dr. Crothers; _Our national
parks_ by John Muir; _Wake-robin_ by John Burroughs; Parkman’s
_Oregon trail_; Dana’s _Two years before the mast_; _Tom Sawyer_;
_The Americanization of Edward Bok_; _Uncle Tom’s cabin_; _The life
and letters of Walter H. Page_; _Uncle Remus_; Bradford’s _Lee the
American_; _The last of the Mohicans_; _Poems_ of Longfellow; Wharton’s
_Ethan Frome_.

Barely glancing at such a list you will instantly ask: “Why don’t you
include Woodrow Wilson, Theodore Roosevelt, Anna Howard Shaw, Bryant,
Whittier, Zane Grey?”—but I must stop you! There are so many! Yet
if this list I am making for you stirs you to make a better one for
yourself—then that is exactly the best thing it can do for you.

Styles in writing change as do styles in dress, and in order to be
sympathetic with books not of our own day it is necessary often to
know something of the times in which they were written. So a book on
the history of American literature, such as W. C. Bronson’s, is a good
thing to study along with the reading. And this book is delightful to
read, as is also, _What can literature do for me_, by C. Alphonso Smith.

A convenient way to handle the history of American literature is to
divide it as the textbooks do into three periods: The Colonial from
1607 to 1765; the Revolutionary, from 1765 to 1789; and the Period of
the Republic, from 1789 to the present.

Each of these periods has its own peculiar literature, for books
reflect not only their writers, but also their times. So true is this,
that you will find out about a nation more accurately from reading
its stories, poetry and plays, than by studying its records and
histories. And so, because we are Americans with a peculiar history,
and a peculiar and a great destiny, and because our American books best
interpret us to ourselves, every American ought to know the outstanding
books of each of these periods.

The writing of the Colonial Period was for the most part crude and
imitative. The Pilgrims and Puritans were not book-loving people. They
were deeply religious folk, deeply daring, and masterful, fighting
with such odds as few men in all history have met and conquered. They
did original things, but not in books with their pens. Yet the famous
Mayflower Compact and Bradford’s _History of Plimouth Plantation_ are
enough to glorify any time or people.

Books were not the natural product of the Revolutionary Period, either.
Men do not fight and write at the same time. Nor do they build empires
and books together. Think of what filled the minds and imaginations of
the “Founding Fathers” as the late President Harding called them—the
war with England, the dreams of independence, of a new and different
nation, of vast states lying westward, farms and factories, and all the
mighty machinery, all the wealth required to build and establish their
new nation! It was a time for much political thinking, a time not only
for stump pulling, but for stump speaking. And as a matter of fact, the
best writings of this period were letters, like those of Jefferson, and
political pamphlets, like those of Hamilton and Thomas Paine (everybody
should read his _Common sense_ and _The crisis_), and orations, like
those by Patrick Henry and James Otis.

There are two great and simple books, however, belonging here which
are pure literature and worthy of a place among the twelve which
I have chosen: the _Journal_ of the Quaker, John Woolman, and the
_Autobiography_ of Benjamin Franklin, the wise man of the world.
Quakers may be wise, too, but for canny wit, common sense, humor,
honesty and everything else you can think of, especially learning and
industry, as making up the typical Yankee, you find them shaken down
and running over in B. Franklin of Boston and Philadelphia, and the
world, and all time. You must read this autobiography, though it is not
in the list of twelve.

We really find the culture, the leisure, the perspective for literary
work for the first time in America during the Period of the Republic,
which follows the colonizing, the pioneering, and the fighting. We
are still a westward-moving people, still on the frontier, spreading,
multiplying, building, growing rich and strong and united. But we are a
nation now; the spirit of democracy has taken hold on our social life;
we have a social philosophy, a proud past, a thrilling present, and a
mighty future. Now we can speak, for now we have something to say.

In the year following the adoption of the Constitution, when the young
nation was getting its breath and bearings, our writers multiplied
tremendously, especially the poets, long-winded, pony-gaited mavericks,
who should have been hitched to the plow. But that was the trouble
with American literature, everybody had been hitched too much to
the plow and too little to the pen. Yet how could it be otherwise
in a land so new, so hardly won? But all of this poor poetry was a
preparation—first, of the minds of the people for the greater work
to come; and, second, of the pens of the masters who were already in
training and about to come. When a great wave breaks crashing on the
shore, you know the swell started away off at sea. So with every great
wave of literature. The Golden Age of American letters, beginning with
Bryant and closing with the death of Oliver Wendell Holmes, took its
very definite start in the tremendous years from 1789 to 1809. But
those years themselves have left us almost nothing. The year 1809,
however, is one to remember. _Knickerbocker’s history of New York_ was
published that year, and real literature in America began. Mark that
date in red.

But meantime if everybody was writing, everybody was reading. The
spread of the newspaper and the birth and growth of the magazine were
two of the notable literary signs of these early years of the new
Republic. The people were hungry for reading. The whole nation was like
a man who has always been denied books and pictures and music, and who,
at thirty-five or forty, wakes up to a keen realization of his loss.

The nation had dreamed and dared, had fought and plowed and broken
trails, had leveled forests, peopled prairies, opened mines, built
mills and roads, and now was pausing to look about and ask what it
meant, and what it was all to mean. Bread the nation had. Now it wanted
books. A body it had. But did it have a soul? To do and to have—that is
first; to know, to feel, to be—that is second, but it is an even deeper
need.

Along with the spread of periodicals came the drama, the short
story, and the novel. Our first professional man of letters, the
first American to devote all of his time to literary work, Charles
Brockden Brown, published in 1798 a powerful and terrible novel called
_Wieland_, which perhaps should be reckoned as the first piece of
durable fiction done in our country. What a flood has followed it!
Brown himself did ten such tales. And they are worth reading. If you
want to feel your hair curl into barbed wire on your bare skull, and
your spinal column walk off and leave the rest of your congealed
anatomy, read _Wieland_ or _Edgar Huntley_.

Washington Irving was our first international writer. With the
publication of


THE SKETCH BOOK

in 1820, a certain Englishman’s contemptuous question “Who reads an
American book?” was forever answered. Everybody read, and still reads,
“Rip Van Winkle”[1] and “The legend of Sleepy Hollow,” two of the
pieces in _The sketch book_. It is for these two stories particularly
that I have chosen _The sketch book_ as the first reading in this
course.

I envy the man who has never read them. He has two evenings of pure
chuckles in store for him. Shiftless, lazy Rip! The dear old toper is
as real a person as George Washington, and so much more human! “There
is no finer character-sketch in our literature than the lovable old
vagabond, as he goes slouching through the village, his arms full of
children, a troop of dogs at his heels, and the shrill pursuing voice
of Dame Winkle dying away in the distance.” I lived long enough ago
to see Joseph Jefferson play the part of Rip—one of the sinful sweet
memories of my Methodist youth! Rip made it hard for Mrs. Van Winkle,
and she made it hard for him—and there is much to be said on both sides.

“The legend of Sleepy Hollow” is a twin story of the early Dutch
settlements along the Hudson, in which you will make the acquaintance
of another immortal character, one schoolmaster by the name of Ichabod
Crane.

Comment is unnecessary. Irving is to be read, like most story-tellers,
and enjoyed. If you like his poetic, tender, genial, and humorous style
there will be nothing in this course which you will not enjoy. For
this is a reading program, not one of study. It kills real literature
to study it. Take James Fenimore Cooper, our first, and still our
greatest adventure writer, and read—I don’t know which to say of the
Leatherstocking Tales! If I say _The last of the Mohicans_, then I will
wish I had said _The deerslayer_, the first of the series, of which
_The pathfinder_ and _The pioneers_, and _The prairie_ are the rest.
And if I say one of these tales of the Indians, then I can’t ask you
to read _The pilot_, one of the best sea stories ever written, and one
of the first; nor can I tell you that you ought, by all means, to read
_The spy_, which to my thinking, for sheer suspense, for escape, for
pathos, and nobleness of character, beats any other book of adventure I
know.

But it is the vast woods and prairies, the Indian, and that early
pioneer life of the frontier that Cooper does best, and upon which
rests his fame. No one else will ever again paint for us, on so mighty
a canvas, with such fresh and splendid colors, the scenes of that
white-man-red-man time. Read


THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS

All five of these great tales are five acts in the thrilling drama of
Leatherstocking’s life, the most complete character in literature,
starting as a young hunter in _The deerslayer_ and disappearing
westward, an old man, in _The prairie_, shouldering his gun, calling
his dogs, hitting his last trail. Those five books are our great
American epic.

Don’t be over-critical, nor too grown-up in reading Cooper. People who
get that way die soon. Most of them are dead inside already. Cooper is
an adventure writer, not a novelist of society. He can draw a prince
of an Indian, and a scout without an equal; but you could whittle a
better woman, a more human one, I mean, out of a hickory stick. Never
mind his females. You will find enough of them in the course of your
reading. Be glad that they are unnecessary here, and give yourself over
to the woods, the tracking, and the slaughter. Don’t skip the scenery.
Cooper’s woods are primeval, deep, shadowy, full of shapes and sounds
and terrors. There is nothing left in the wild, nor to be found in
other books, so wild as Cooper’s woods.

And don’t be troubled with the goodness of Cooper’s Indians. It is
the adventure and the scene you must get here. Ask yourself where you
ever read a better story, or anything more tragic, more dramatic, more
thrilling than the death of Uncas?

Turn now from the novel to a very different reading in poetry.
Everybody loves a story, and so does everybody love poetry—the regular
rhythm, the measured line, the rhyme, the stanza. For these devices
are older than the mechanics of prose, more elemental, and appeal more
easily, more directly, to us. That is why the oldest literatures are
always in verse form. It explains why children can read and love poetry
before they can read prose, and why it is that the things we commit to
memory, the things quoted by a whole nation, and remembered by all the
world are in verse.

William Cullen Bryant, our first great American poet, was born in
1794, five years after Cooper, and had he written but his first poem,
“Thanatopsis” (it was done in his seventeenth year), he would have been
immortal. That poem (its Greek name means “a view of death”), done in
blank verse, the old heroic line of the Latin and English writers, is
one of the stateliest, sublimest things ever written, “combining the
richness of the organ with the freedom of the swaying woods and the
rolling sea.”

In addition to “Thanatopsis” read “To a waterfowl” which most critics
pronounce the most perfect poem from Bryant’s pen, and which perhaps is
as nearly “perfect” in its way as any American poem. It is to a lone
wild duck flying across the fading autumnal sky.

  “Whither, midst falling dew....”

—but I haven’t room to quote it. Learn it, all of it. It will almost
save your soul. And along with it read “A forest hymn,” “The prairies,”
“The yellow violet,” and “Inscription for the entrance to a wood.”

What shall I do, give you only Bryant out of all of our poets? And not
let you have John Greenleaf Whittier, or Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, or
Oliver Wendell Holmes—to say nothing of the two greatest geniuses of
them all, Edgar Allen Poe and Walt Whitman! If I could take but one of
these I think it would be Whittier, because he is the simplest, most
direct, most homely and American. He is to us what Bobby Burns is to
Scotland. If there is a single American who doesn’t know “Snow bound”
and “The barefoot boy,” and “Telling the bees,” he ought to be given a
day in solitary confinement so as to catch up with his needs. Whittier
was a Quaker, and, consequently, a fighter, ardent in his support of
the Union in the Civil War. His “Barbara Frietchie” is the best ballad
to come out of that awful conflict. We were all on one or the other
side in that bitter time. There is no side now, thank heaven, but one
glorious land, one national soul, one literature giving it life and
form and color.

You will all say, “Why not take Longfellow?” We will if you say so. He
certainly is America’s favorite poet. I remember when he died in 1882.
I grew up on him. “Tell me not in mournful numbers” must have been read
to me in my cradle. Read again for this course, “Hymn to the night,”
“A psalm of life,” “Paul Revere’s ride” (if you cannot already recite
them from memory); and besides these, you should read “Evangeline”
and “Hiawatha,” two of our long poems, one a story, the other an
allegorical interpretation of the Indian, which are as fresh today as
on the day they were published.

By asking you to read so many poems from so many poets I have made the
exclusive selection of one poet’s work impossible. I am going to escape
by taking a collection of the best of all of them. There are any number
of good American anthologies, such as


AMERICAN POEMS (1625-1892)

_Edited by W. C. Bronson_

and _American poetry_ edited by Percy H. Boynton[2]. Both of these
books have good notes and I am recommending the Bronson because I
happen to be better acquainted with it, and because I think its
notes fit very well into this reading scheme. This collection does
not include any of our recent poetry, which is really in a class by
itself and can best be had in such anthologies as Untermeyer’s _Modern
American poetry_[3]. I hate to leave this subject of poetry, for I
have left unmentioned the three most original, most daring, most gifted
of them all, Whitman, Emerson and Poe. I will take just space enough
to mention two poems of each of these that everyone should know: “The
problem” and “Days” by Emerson; “The haunted palace” and “The conqueror
worm” by Poe; “Out of the cradle endlessly rocking” and “Come up from
the fields, Father” by Whitman.

But I must now suggest a volume of short stories. Which volume? The
short story as a literary form, in theory and conscious art, anyway,
was invented by Edgar Allen Poe. He set a model for all time, and few,
if any, of those who have followed him have equaled him in his own
peculiar field. For there are many varieties of short stories that have
been developed since Poe staked out the short-story claim. And as for
short-story writers, they are as thick as fleas.

As part of the object of this course is to scrape a small acquaintance
with American literature, as well as to have a good time reading,
I am going to suggest that you take your choice of Poe’s _Tales_,
Hawthorne’s _Twice told tales_, a volume of Bret Harte’s short stories,
Sarah Orne Jewett’s _Deephaven_, or Mary E. Wilkins Freeman’s _A humble
romance_. A still better scheme would be to read one or two of the
best from each of these authors, as well as others among our story
writers. Suppose we take “The fall of the house of Usher” by Poe;
“The ambitious guest” by Hawthorne; “The outcasts of Poker Flat” by
Harte; “A New England nun” by Mrs. Freeman; “A man without a country”
by Edward Everett Hale, and “Posson Jone” by George W. Cable. They will
be equal in bulk to a fair volume, and equal in thrill and fun to all
winter at the movies.

No two of these are the least alike. If I had named one of O. Henry’s,
like “The gift of the Magi,” that would still be different. O. Henry is
the shortest of short-story writers. From the slow discursive sketch
of Irving to the crisp brief incident, with the unexpected turn at the
end, as invented by “O. Henry” (William Sydney Porter was his human
name), runs the short story, and represents the most highly developed,
most artistic of literary prose forms. These that I have named and many
more can be had in the single volume


REPRESENTATIVE AMERICAN SHORT STORIES

_Edited by Alexander Jessup_

May I put in here a strong word for the essay and suggest that one of
our dozen books be a volume of


EMERSON’S ESSAYS

Here are ten good reasons for my selection: (1) Their sheer beauty of
style; (2) their high moral quality; (3) their eloquent majesty of
thought; (4) their pithy rememberable sayings; (5) their richness of
suggestion; (6) their stimulus to higher thought and purer feelings;
(7) their doctrine of individualism; (8) their appeal for simple
living; (9) their universality; (10) their elemental themes.

You will not find them dry or hard or lacking in direct appeal. They
will challenge you. They will blow through your thinking as a pure
cold current of mountain air blows through the fevered atmosphere of a
sick room. The essay, among all our literary forms, with the exception
of the letter, is the most direct, most personal, best adapted for
information and persuasion. Nor is it, when handled by a master, less
satisfying artistically than story or poetry.

We have had the novel of adventure in Cooper, purely romantic as
against the realistic. In this same realm, but dealing with utterly
different material, is


THE SCARLET LETTER

_By Hawthorne_

a tragedy of sin, an epic of the soul. To Hawthorne the supernatural
was as real as nature itself; good and evil, inner and outer, are in
constant conflict throughout his pages. The scarlet letter Hester
wears is a symbol, and symbolism is the key to Hawthorne’s method and
meaning.

As a preparation for this novel one ought to recall the spirit of the
old colonial times in New England, the deep religiousness, the belief
in witches, and the vivid sense of the supernatural. In order to enjoy
any story one must understand its background, must be able to get out
of his own day, away from his own customs, back to the life of the
story, as if he were a very part of it.

This will have to be done for the next story, William Dean Howells’


THE RISE OF SILAS LAPHAM

a realistic novel of the manners and ambitions of Boston society
some forty years ago. For a good study of realism and romanticism in
fiction, in fact for a good study of this whole art of the novel, get
Professor Bliss Perry’s _A study of prose fiction_.[4] And for a text
covering in a brief illuminating way the whole of American literature,
take Bronson’s _Short history of American literature_[5] mentioned
above.[6]

The next book I will name is Mark Twain’s


TOM SAWYER

though many critics would say _Huckleberry Finn_, while others declare
his _Life on the Mississippi_ the greatest of the three, and one of
the permanent things in American literature. They are really three in a
great trilogy—the story of his own life in the Mississippi Valley, of
a time now gone but which still has mightily to do with the times that
now are, and that are to be.

Before closing this short list, may I be allowed to hold open the door
to the library a moment longer, just to glance at a few more titles?
There I see

  THE PIT
  _By Frank Norris_

a Chicago story of wheat and the Board of Trade—a terrible tale which
thrills of present-day American life. I see too

  THE GENTLE READER
  _By Samuel McChord Crothers_

a volume of gentle, whimsical essays, which will be a good test of your
literary taste and appreciation. Along with these stands

  ETHAN FROME
  _By Edith Wharton_

a grim tale of inner torture against a bare New England background—two
lovers who tried to die together but who only succeeded in making
themselves cripples, compelled to live the rest of their lives under
the same roof with the wife from whom Ethan tried to escape.

And here, finally, is a book published only a few years ago,

  THE LIFE AND LETTERS OF WALTER H. PAGE
  _By Burton J. Hendrick_

a biography but more than a biography, for it gives not only a rich
and illuminating life-story of our ambassador to England during the
World War but an account, at the same time graphic and intimate, of
the world-important events in which he played a vital part. Many of
the letters are no less than a revelation of Anglo-American relations
leading up to the entry of the United States into the war and of the
influence of certain men—President Wilson, Colonel House, Lord Grey,
Balfour and others—upon those relations. The work of Mr. Hendrick in
the biography proper and in the connecting links between the letters
(a small proportion of the whole book) is ably done but it is the
letters themselves, with their vigor, their humor, their charm of
style, that win for this book a place among biographies which are also
literature—and thus a place in this course.

So I might go on until I had named a hundred, and more than a hundred
great American books, all of them marked by both durable matter and
manner, books that not only get hold of the mind and heart, but which
also reveal to us glimpses of the past and dreams of what the future of
America shall be.

But these, together with Bronson’s _Short history of American
literature_, are the twelve which I have chosen for this program:
(1) _The sketch book_ by Irving; (2) _The last of the Mohicans_, a
romantic adventure by Cooper; (3) _American poems (1625-1892)_ edited
by W. C. Bronson; (4) _Representative American short stories_ edited
by Alexander Jessup; (5) the _Essays_ of Emerson (first series will be
good); (6) _The scarlet letter_ by Hawthorne; (7) _The rise of Silas
Lapham_ by Howells; (8) _Tom Sawyer_ by Mark Twain; (9) _The pit_ by
Frank Norris; (10) _The gentle reader_ by Samuel McChord Crothers; (11)
_Ethan Frome_ by Edith Wharton; (12) _The life and letters of Walter H.
Page_ by Burton J. Hendrick.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] This story is found in the volume of _Representative American short
stories_ edited by Alexander Jessup and published by Allyn and Bacon.
See page 25.

[2] Scribner.

[3] Harcourt.

[4] Houghton Mifflin.

[5] Heath.

[6] See page 13.




BOOKS RECOMMENDED IN THIS COURSE


  THE SKETCH BOOK                            _Washington Irving_

  THE LAST OF THE MOHICANS                   _James Fenimore Cooper_

  AMERICAN POEMS (1625-1892)                 _W. C. Bronson_, Ed.
  Univ. of Chicago Press, 1912. $2.75

  REPRESENTATIVE AMERICAN SHORT STORIES      _Alexander Jessup_, Ed.
  Allyn and Bacon, 1923. $4.00

  ESSAYS, FIRST SERIES                       _Ralph Waldo Emerson_

  THE SCARLET LETTER                         _Nathaniel Hawthorne_

  THE RISE OF SILAS LAPHAM                   _William Dean Howells_
  Houghton, 1885. $2.00

  THE ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER               _Mark Twain_
  Harper, 1876. $2.25

  THE PIT                                    _Frank Norris_
  Doubleday, 1903. $0.95

  THE GENTLE READER                          _Samuel McChord Crothers_
  Houghton, 1903. $1.75

  ETHAN FROME                                _Edith Wharton_
  Scribner, 1911. $1.75

  THE LIFE AND LETTERS OF WALTER H. PAGE     _Burton J. Hendrick_
  Doubleday 1922. 2v. $10.00


  A SHORT HISTORY OF AMERICAN LITERATURE     _W. C. Bronson_
  Heath, rev. 1919. $1.72






*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOME GREAT AMERICAN BOOKS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


